# Annotation Quality Metrics
We employ a diverse suite of metrics to evaluate the quality of gene predictions produced by the evaluated tools and pipelines. Below, we summarize those metrics and indicate how to generate them.

* **Transcriptome BUSCO score**. For a set of predicted transcripts, we assess the fraction of conserved single-copy orthologs (i.e. BUSCOs) with the software [BUSCO](https://busco.ezlab.org/), using appropriate taxonomic databases for each organismal group (e.g. arthropods for the *Drosophila* species. BUSCO score is computed as 1-(missing BUSCOs/number of BUSCO targets in database). Because this score can be constrained by the quality and completeness of the genome assembly for which gene predictions are made, to look for general patterns across species we evalute the **BUSCO score ratio**, which is simply the ratio of the BUSCO score obtained for the set of predicted transcripts to that obtained for the genome. Example slurm scripts for running BUSCO in transcriptome and genome mode using the *arthropoda* BUSCO database are in the [slurm_scripts](https://github.com/harvardinformatics/GenomeAnnotation/tree/master/PerformanceMetrics/slurm_scripts) directory.

* **RNA-seq alignment rate**. One way of asessing the completeness of a set of gene predictions is to assess whether a set of predicted transcripts adequately captures the k-mers observed in the actual transcsribed sequences. An indirect way of measuring this is to evaluate the alignment rate of RNA-seq reads back to the predicted transcripts (even if those those transcripts were derived with methods that utilize RNA-seq data). The aligment rate is also of direct practical relevance for researchers as it indicates how much of their RNA-seq data would get discarded up front simply by failing to map, which could impact expression estimates as well as variant calling with RNA-seq reads. We extract overall alignment rates from RSEM log files for individual samples and calculate mean and median alignment rate using GetMedianAnnotationAlignRate.py.
